
# Maven (essential information)

Maven is a software **project life cycle management tool**.

It implements:

* dependencies resolution + automatic download of missing;
* building and testing of code;
* deployment of software;
* etc.

Maven's functionality is extensible with plugins, so it's possible to use it
_not only_ for Java code (primary goal of this tool), but also for code, written
in other languages. You can read more about Maven in following book (freely
available).

Maven differs from other tools, such as `Ant` — it describes *what we want to do*,
in contrast with Ant, that describes *how to do it*.

> Maven describes what we want to do

> Ant describes how we do it

Maven uses declarative style to describe tasks that we want to execute, and all
described tasks are performed by the corresponding plugins.

## Project Object Model (POM)

Description of software lifecycle and information about project is stored in
`pom.xml` file, that should exist in root directory of the project (and in
root directories of sub-projects, if your project is separated into several
modules). Project's information includes name, identifier and version of the
project, and often includes more information: URL of project's site, information
about source code repository (so you can use mvn scm:update goal to update code,
for example), etc.

* the file pom.xml holds the project object model configuration data;
* the pom.xml file should exist in root directory of the project;
* it is possible to have multiple sub-projects, each with their own pom.xml;

Project Object Model (POM) defines set of stages for project's lifecycle — they
are called "lifecycle phases". Each phase can include several tasks (goals),
that define what will be performed on given stage. There are several common
stages: compilation (compile), testing (test), creation of package (package),
and installation (install). Each of these phases has dependencies on other
phases, that should be executed before its invocation (compilation should be
executed before testing, testing before packaging, etc.).

* software projects in maven are made up of lifecycle phases;
* each phase can include several tasks called 'goals';
* goals define what will be performd on given stage;
* there are several common stages: compile, test, package and install;
* each of these has dependencies on other that should be executed before/after;

Usually developer uses phase's name to start a process. For example, mvn
package, or mvn install, etc. But developer can also execute concrete Maven's
goal. To do this, he should specify name of plugin, that implements concrete
goal, and task name in given plugin. For example, `mvn clojure:run` will start
Clojure and execute script, specified in configuration. We need to mention, that
list of goals, that are executed for concrete lifecycle phase isn't constant —
you can change this list by modifying plugin's configuration.
